Add Installing and managing applications in Vanilla OS Guide (#37)
Vanilla-OS/handbook: _posts/2023-01-11-install-and-manage-applications.md

---
title: Install and manage Applications
description: Learn how to install and manage applications on Vanilla OS
date: 2023-01-11
layout: article
authors: 
    - kbdharun
    - MonsterObserver
published: true
---

## Introduction

Vanilla OS allows installing packages and software from multiple sources. This guide will discuss them in detail.

> Vanilla OS comes with Flatpaks and AppImages enabled by default. It allows the installation of native packages using the `apx` package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vanilla OS comes with the option to enable Flatpak, AppImage and Snap in the initial setup. It allows the installation of native packages using the `apx` package manager. (Note:- At the time of writing this guide, Snap is not yet supported in Vanilla OS)
```

## Terminologies

> - **Flatpaks**:- Flatpaks are a popular packaging format allowing the installation of Desktop applications in a sandboxed environment isolated from the system with shared libraries between them. Flatpak provides developers with a unified way to distribute apps for most GNU/Linux distributions. Flatpaks supports adding various remote repositories, the most popular repository being Flathub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Flatpaks**:- Flatpak is a popular packaging format allowing the installation of Desktop applications in a sandboxed environment isolated from the system with shared libraries between them. Flatpak provides developers with a unified way to distribute apps for most GNU/Linux distributions. Flatpak supports adding various remote repositories, the most popular repository being Flathub.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Is this extra space intentional?

Reviewer 2: I mean the space in line 21

Author: Seems to be an error, will remove it.

- **Flathub**:- Flathub is the largest repository of Flatpak applications spanning various categories.

> Snaps:- Snaps is an alternative packaging format by Canonical (the creators of Ubuntu) for installing thousands of applications from the Snapcraft repository. They facilitate installing applications in Servers and various GNU/Linux distributions. Snaps contain hundreds of verified packages and software from publishers.

Reviewer: Missing code format

> Snaps:- Snaps is an alternative packaging format by Canonical (the creators of Ubuntu) for installing thousands of applications from the Snapcraft repository. They facilitate installing applications in Servers and various GNU/Linux distributions. Snaps contain hundreds of verified packages and software from publishers.

Reviewer 3: We also need to add a note for snap, something like: "Note that at the time of writing, Snap is not yet supported in Vanilla OS."

> Snaps:- Snaps is an alternative packaging format by Canonical (the creators of Ubuntu) for installing thousands of applications from the Snapcraft repository. They facilitate installing applications in Servers and various GNU/Linux distributions. Snaps contain hundreds of verified packages and software from publishers.

Reviewer: Added the note

> - **AppImages**:- AppImage is a format for distributing portable software or executables on Linux without needing superuser permissions to install the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **AppImage**:- AppImage is a format for distributing portable software or executables on Linux without needing superuser permissions to install the application.
```

- **Package Manager**:- A package manager or package-management system is a utility with a collection of software tools that automates the process of installing, upgrading, configuring, and removing applications or packages.
`apx` is the package manager which comes with Vanilla OS. It is the equivalent command for Winget on Windows.
- **APX**:- `apx` is the default package manager in Vanilla OS. It allows installing applications from multiple sources in managed containers.
- **APT**:- `apt` is an Advanced Package Tool which allows installing and managing software on Debian and Debian-based systems like Ubuntu.
- **DNF**:- `dnf` (Dandified YUM) is the successor to YUM. It is a powerful package manager for installing and managing applications on rpm-based distributions. 
- **AUR**:- `aur` (Arch User Repository) is the largest community-maintained repository with thousands of native packages for Arch Linux and its derivatives.

> - **APK**:- `apk`(Alpine Linux package keeper) is a package manager which allows installing and managing applications on Alpine Linux.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **APK**:- `apk` (Alpine Linux package keeper) is a package manager which allows installing and managing applications on Alpine Linux.
```

> - **DEB**:- deb (Debian Packages) is a file format for installing and managing applications on Debian-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.rpm` in GNU/Linux.

Reviewer 3: Missing code format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DEB**:- `deb` (Debian Packages) is a file format for installing and managing applications on Debian-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.rpm` in GNU/Linux.
```

> - **RPM**:- rpm (Red Hat package manager) is a file format for installing and managing applications on Red Hat-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.deb` in GNU/Linux.

Reviewer 2: Also missing code format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **RPM**:- `rpm` (Red Hat package manager) is a file format for installing and managing applications on Red Hat-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.deb` in GNU/Linux.
```

## Installing Applications through GNOME Software

- Flatpaks and Snaps can be installed with ease using the GNOME Software graphically. It is the recommended method to install packages.

> - If you have disabled snaps, you can still install Flatpaks using GNOME Software and install applications from the evergrowing [Flathub](https://flathub.org/home) repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have disabled Snap, you can still install Flatpaks using GNOME Software and install applications from the evergrowing [Flathub](https://flathub.org/home) repository.
```

> - If you have disabled Flatpaks, you can install applications as a Snap through GNOME Software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have disabled Flatpak, you can still install Snaps through GNOME Software.
```

![GNOME Software](/assets/uploads/gnome-software-43.webp)

### Searching Applications

- You can search for applications in GNOME Software by clicking on the Search icon in the top left corner.
- If the application you searched for exists, it will be displayed, and you can proceed with the installation.
- If the application you searched for doesn't exist, you can use an alternative method suggested below in this guide to install it.

### Updating Applications

- Updates are visible in the `Updates` panel in GNOME Software. In Vanilla OS, Updates are available for Snaps and Flatpaks through it. 
- Automatic Updates are configured by clicking on `Update Preferences` in the Sidebar and enabling Automatic Updates. Optionally, you can switch on `Automatic Update Notifications` to be informed about updated applications.

![GNOME Software Update Proferences](/assets/uploads/gnome-software-update-preferences.webp)

### Removing Applications

- You can remove the installed Flatpaks and Snaps from the Installed Panel in GNOME Software. 
(Note: Some native applications installed in the host will not support removing using this method in Vanilla OS)

## Installing AppImages

> - AppImages is one of the recommended ways to execute applications. If you have enabled AppImages in the first setup, You can run it graphically using the following steps:-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- AppImages is one of the recommended ways to install applications. If you have enabled AppImage in the first setup, You can run it graphically using the following steps:-
```

    - Right-click on the file, then click on `Properties`.
    
   ![AppImages Properties](/assets/uploads/appimages-nautilus-properties.webp)
    
    - Enable the `Executable as Program` option.
    - Now, you can run the AppImage by right-clicking it and pressing run or by pressing enter/return key on the keyboard.

Alternatively, you can open AppImages from the command line using the following commands:-

```bash
cd <directory>
chmod +x <file>.appimage
./<file>.appimage
```

Note:- `chmod +x <file>.AppImage` makes the file executable.

 ![Running Krita using AppImage](/assets/uploads/appimages-nautilus-properties.webp)

## Installing Flatpaks from the Command line

- Flatpaks if enabled in the First Setup, can be installed from the command line using the command:-

```bash

> flatpak install flathub <application-id>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flatpak install <remote> <application-id>
```

```
- You can run the applications using the desktop entry (icon) from the application menu, or you can run it manually through:-

```bash
flatpak run <application-id>
```
- You can remove installed applications using the following command:-

```bash
flatpak uninstall <application-id>
```

- You can remove all the leftover data of the application using the following command (Disclaimer: Proceed with caution as this might lead to data loss):-

```bash
flatpak uninstall <application-id> --delete-data
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe it could be interesting to also document `flatpak uninstall --unused` to clean dependencies.

Author: Thanks, I will add it too tomorrow.

- If you want to install Flatpaks but have disabled it in the first setup, follow the guide [here](/2022/12/09/install-flatpaks.html).

## Installing Snaps from the Command line

> - If you have selected Snaps in the first setup, you can run the following command to install Snaps:-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have selected Snap in the first setup, you can run the following command to install Snaps:-
```

- Alternatively, you can install the applications by entering the Fedora container using the following commands:-

```bash
apx enter --dnf
sudo dnf install <packages>
exit
apx export --dnf <packages>
```

### Uninstalling Applications from the Fedora Container

- You can uninstall applications from the Fedora container using the following command:-

```bash
apx remove --dnf <package>
```

- This command will automatically detect and remove the desktop file entry.

- Alternatively, you can uninstall the applications by entering the Fedora container using the following commands:-

```bash
apx enter --dnf
sudo dnf remove <packages>
exit
apx unexport --dnf <packages>
```

### Installing Applications in the Arch Linux Container

- You can install applications in the Arch Linux container using the following command:-

```bash
apx install --aur <packages>
```

- This command will automatically detect the desktop file entry in the package and add it to the application menu and Vanilla Control Center.

- Alternatively, you can install the applications by entering the Arch Linux container using the following commands:-

```bash
apx enter --aur

> sudo pacman -S <packages>

Reviewer 2: `pacman -S` doesn't refresh the repos. It's probably better to use `pacman -Syu`

Reviewer 2: I used to use Arch BTW

Author: So, hmm `pacman -Syu <package>`?

Reviewer 2: Yes. `-u` updates packages and `-y` refreshes the repos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo pacman -Syu <packages>
```

- **Flathub**:- Flathub is the largest repository of Flatpak applications spanning various categories.
- **Snap**:- Snap is an alternative packaging format by Canonical (the creators of Ubuntu) for installing thousands of applications from the Snapcraft repository. They facilitate installing applications in Servers and various GNU/Linux distributions. Snapcraft contains hundreds of verified packages and software from publishers. (_**Note**_: At the time of writing this guide, Snap is not yet supported in Vanilla OS)
- **AppImage**:- AppImage is a format for distributing portable software or executables on Linux without needing superuser permissions to install the application.
- **GNOME Software**:- GNOME Software allows you to find, install and remove new applications and system extensions. It showcases screenshots, metadata and user reviews of various applications. In Vanilla OS, It supports installing Flatpaks and Snaps. GNOME Software is the Linux equivalent of the Microsoft Store, Play Store and App Store.

> - **Package Manager**:- A package manager or package-management system is a utility with a collection of software tools that automates the process of installing, upgrading, configuring, and removing applications or packages.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Package Manager**:- A package manager or package-management system is a utility with a collection of software tools that automates installing, upgrading, configuring, and removing applications or packages.
```
